# Managerial Economics

## Module 2

This module on the Macroeconomy provides an overview of the United States economy. The U.S. is a large, open, diversified and productive economy that is in the midst of a global pandemic. This will be evident in the data you will use in this course. Our focus will be on forces that drive the macroeconomy and key performance indicators (KPIs), including GDP, Inflation and Unemployment.

**By the end of this module you should be able to**

- Identify trends and key driving forces in the U.S. Economy (e.g., demographics, education, household consumption, production, government, trade and business cycle fluctuations).
- Use key performance indicators to gauge the state of the economy: GDP, Inflation and Unemployment.
- Use the national income accounting identity to assess the size and composition of the macroeconomy: Y = C + I + G + NX.
- Identify how the Circular Flow of goods and services is linked to GDP measurement.
- Understand how inflation is measured and how the measure is used.
- Link surveys and alternative measures of unemployment to macroeconomic performance.
- Locate and interpret U.S. data that are essential for managerial decision-making.

## Macroeconomic KPIs: GDP, Inflation, Unemployment

Goal: Understand the meaning & measurement of key macroeconomic statistics:

- Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
- Consumer Price Index (CPI)
- Unemployment rate

## Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

GDP: value of all final economic goods & services produced in a country during a specific period of time.

There are three main ways to measure GDP:

1. _Expenditure approach_: This is based on spending (most common).

   Y = C + I + G + NX

1. _Income approach_: Total income is generated by goods & services produced.

   GDP = Total National Income + Sales Taxes + Depreciation + Net Foreign Factor Income

1. _Value added approach_

### Expenditure & Income Approaches

Key idea for GDP: **Expenditure = Income** (every \$ spent by a buyer becomes income to a seller)

- Total expenditure on domestically-produced final goods & services
- Total income earned by domestically-located factors of production

### The Circular Flow Model

Upper part is the market for resources. Households sell resources to businesses for income.

Bottom part is the market for goods and services. Businesses sell G/S to households for revenue.

### Real vs. Nominal GDP

GDP is the value of all final goods & services produced:

- **Nominal GDP** measures the values using current prices.
- **Real GDP** measures the values using prices of a constant base year (controls for inflation).

**Inflation rate**: percentage increase in the overall level of prices

- One measure of the price level: **GDP deflator**

  GDP deflator = 100 \* (Nominal GDP / Real GDP)

### Chain-Weighted Real GDP

- Over time, relative prices change & the base year must be updated.
- Chain-weighted real GDP updates the base year every year, so it is more accurate than constant-price GDP.

### Recession

A general rule of thumb is that two consecutive quarters of declining real GDP constitute a recession.

In the U.S., recessions are dated by (i.e., the start and end dates) the NBER (National Bureau of Economic Research)

---

## Inflation

A general, sustained upward movement of prices of goods and services in an economy.

The most widely reported measure of inflation is the consumer price index, or CPI.

### Consumer Price Index

The **CPI** measures the average change over time in the prices paid by urban consumers for a market basket of consumer goods and services. The current basket includes about 80,000 items consumers buy on a regular basis.

- A measure of the overall level of prices
- Published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
- Uses:
  - Tracks changes in the typical household's cost of living
  - adjusts many contracts for inflation ("COLAs")
  - allows comparisons of dollar amounts over time

#### How the BLS Constructs the CPI

1. Survey consumers to determine composition of the typical consumer’s “basket” of goods
1. Every month, collect data on prices of all items in the basket; compute cost of basket
1. CPI in any month equals 100 \* (Cost of basket in that month / Cost of basket in base period)

### Two mandate

In modern economies, the central bank influences the nation's money supply. The Federal Reserve System is the central bank in the United States.

Congress has given the Federal Reserve a dual mandate. That is, the Fed is to achieve two economic goals: (1) price stability, and (2) maximum employment.

- **Price stability** is a low and stable rate of inflation maintained over an extended period of time. When this is the case, the inflation rate stays relatively low.

  The Federal Reserve has determined that a 2% inflation rate is the best way to achieve the "price stability" part of the dual mandate. As a bonus, when the Federal Reserve achieves the "price stability" part of its dual mandate, it helps with the other part of its mandate - "maximum employment".

High and volatile inflation can make it difficult for businesses and consumers to plan their future spending. In contrast, when there is price stability, businesses and consumers can invest and spend with confidence. And when they spend and invest more, more goods and services are produced and more workers hired. The increase in hiring moves the economy toward maximum employment.

Overall, the dual mandate supports a healthy economy. The Federal Reserve tries to make sure the inflation rate stays just right.

### CPI may overstate inflation

- **Substitution bias**: CPI uses fixed weights, so it cannot reflect consumers’ ability to substitute toward goods whose relative prices have fallen.
- **Introduction of new goods**: New goods make consumers better off & effectively increase the real value of the dollar. This does not reduce the CPI, because the CPI uses fixed weights.
- **Unmeasured changes in quality**: Quality improvements increase the value of the dollar, but are often not fully measured

## Employment/Unemployment

Employment surveys: Household; Business.

### 1. Household Survey

- **Employed**: working at a paid job
- **Unemployed**: not employed but looking for a job
- **Not in the labor force**: not employed, not looking for work

**Labor force**: the amount of labor available for producing goods & services; all employed plus unemployed persons

**Unemployment rate**: % of the labor force that is unemployed

**Labor force participation rate**: Fraction of the adult population that "participates" in the labor force (see video)

### 2. Establishment Survey

- BLS surveys businesses: Asks how many workers are on payroll.
- Neither measure is perfect. They can diverge due to:
  - treatment of self-employed persons
  - new firms not counted in establishment survey
  - technical issues involving population inferences from sample data

## Summary

**Price level**: measured by either

- Consumer Price Index (CPI): price of a fixed basket of goods purchased by a typical consumer
- GDP deflator: ratio of nominal GDP to real GDP

**Unemployment rate**: fraction of labor force not employed
